SVGPatchLab Technical Report
Render-Derived Node Context
for Grounded SVG Editing
A clean text-only A/B study of counterfactual visual tags
Research question
Can a compact visual description attached to each SVG node help a language model
select the node named by an editing instruction?
Control
DOM skeleton only (skeleton_patch).
Treatment
The identical skeleton plus cached per-node visual fields (visual_stats_patch).
Frozen model
Qwen 2.5 7B through Ollama, temperature 0, text input only.
Current evidence
A 10-case official smoke, an 8-instruction pilot, and a 39-source expanded spatial and
size holdout.
Core finding.On the 39-source path-only holdout, exact target selection rose from7.7%to33.3%. Ten sources
were won only by the visual arm, none only by the skeleton arm. Position grounding improved more than relative-size
grounding, identifying both a real benefit and the next model limitation.
SVGPatchLab Project
25 July 2026
Status: implementation report, pilot evaluation, and expanded controlled holdout. The full official matrix is running; results
are not yet a publication-scale claim.

SVGPatchLab Technical Report Render-Derived Node Context
Contents
1 Executive summary 2
2 Problem statement 2
3 Relationship to LayerSVG 2
4 Method 3
5 Clean A/B boundary 5
6 Sun and cloud case study 5
7 Experimental setup 6
8 Results 7
9 Interpretation 9
10 Limitations and failure modes 9
11 Next steps 9
12 Reproducibility 10
13 Conclusion 10
1

SVGPatchLab Technical Report Render-Derived Node Context
1 Executive summary
The editing model must solve two distinct problems:
1.Grounding:identify which SVG node corresponds to the object described by the user.
2. Editing:apply a valid operation to that node, such as changing fill, adding a contour, or removing the element.
An ordinary protected DOM skeleton exposes structure, tags, styles, and safe geometry summaries, but it
intentionally replaces heavy path coordinates with hashes. A language model can therefore see that four nodes are
red paths without knowing which one is at the top-left. The implemented treatment closes that gap by measuring
each node’s visible contribution and adding a smallvisualobject to its existing JSON record.
The node-hiding operation is a measurement trick, not the edit.A temporary copy of the SVG is rendered
with one node hidden. The pixel difference from the full render describes that node. The temporary SVG is discarded.
The model later emits a patch, and the executor applies that patch once to the original SVG.
The control and treatment share the same model, prompt function, scene serialization, parser, validator, executor,
dataset order, and evaluator. The only treatment change is the attachedvisual field. This makes the experiment
an interpretable A/B test of additional semantic grounding context, not a comparison between unrelated editing
systems.
The official 10-case smoke test improved exact target selection from 70% to 90%, exact patch match from 20% to
50%, and valid output from 60% to 90%. Its grounding subset was already easy for the baseline because the relevant
rectangle and circle coordinates were visible. The stronger diagnostic is the path-only evidence. An 8-instruction
pilot improved from 0% to 75%, and the expanded 39-source holdout improved exact targets and patches from 7.7%
to 33.3%. The holdout had 10 visual-only paired wins and no skeleton-only wins, at a 26.4% prompt-token cost.
2 Problem statement
2.1 Why SVG source alone is not always enough
SVG source is structured, but the structure is not equivalent to visual meaning. A node may be:
•a path whose coordinates are intentionally hidden from the model;
•nested under inherited styles and transforms;
•partly or fully covered by a later-painted element;
•one of several nodes with the same tag and color; or
•visible only through a small, anti-aliased region.
For an instruction such as “add an outline to the small red shape in the top-left,” a protected skeleton may expose
four indistinguishable redpath nodes. DOM order is not a reliable spatial description. A whole rendered image
tells the model what the composition looks like, but it does not establish a deterministic link from image pixels
back to node IDs. The required context is thereforeper-node visual attribution.
2.2 Scope of this work
This report evaluates a lightweight method for selecting existing nodes. It does not claim to solve full semantic
segmentation, raster-to-SVG generation, or arbitrary reconstruction of missing geometry. The principal question is:
If every SVG node carries compact render-derived information about what it contributes, can a frozen
text-only model ground natural-language editing instructions more accurately?
3 Relationship to LayerSVG
LayerSVG studies a different but adjacent problem: converting a raster image into complete, semantically separate,
independently editable SVG layers [1]. Its top-down elimination pipeline selects foreground masks, inpaints regions
2

SVGPatchLab Technical Report Render-Derived Node Context
hidden behind them, and then vectorizes the recovered layers. The paper emphasizes two properties that are
directly relevant here:
•edits should operate on semantically meaningful objects rather than isolated strokes; and
•a lower layer should be complete, so moving or deleting an upper layer does not reveal a hole.
Those principles clarify the boundary of our approach. Render-difference tags can identifywhich existing nodeis the
cloud and how it appears. They cannot recover sun geometry that was never present in the source. LayerSVG uses
generative inpainting while constructing editable layers; SVGPatchLab starts from an existing SVG and performs a
surgical edit. For the latter, generation should be an exceptional completion step, not the default node-selection
mechanism.
LayerSVG also provides a useful efficiency precedent in its stroke-reduction analysis: it assigns a unique RGB
identifier to each stroke, composites the layers, and counts which identifiers remain visible. SVGPatchLab already
has a related ID-buffer implementation. For safe, opaque SVGs, one normal render and one unique-color render
can recover leaf ownership, bbox, area, position, and observed color in a total of two rasterizations, independent of
node count. Opacity, blending, filters, masks, and other unsupported effects route to the more general hide-and-diff
method.
Table 1: LayerSVG and the present system address adjacent stages.
LayerSVG SVGPatchLab visual tags
Input Raster image Existing SVG and edit instruction
Primary goal Build semantic, complete layers Ground an instruction to existing node IDs
Removal role Iterative layer decomposition plus inpainting Temporary counterfactual measurement
Output Newly vectorized layered SVG Validated patch applied to original SVG
Generation Central to hidden-region completion Optional and guarded for genuinely missing
geometry
4 Method
4.1 Counterfactual visual measurement
Let R(S)be a deterministic rasterization of SVGS, and letS\n i be a temporary copy in which nodeni is forced
todisplay:none!important. For a pixelp, the contribution mask is
Mi(p) =1[∥R(S)(p)−R(S\n i)(p)∥∞ >τ].
The implementation uses a 64 by 64 transparent render for compact measurement. FromMi, it calculates:
• bbox: the affected pixel bounds projected into SVG viewBox coordinates withpreserveAspectRatio letter-
boxing accounted for;
•area_pct: the percentage of the canvas affected by hiding;
•position: a coarse spatial label derived from the contribution centroid, such as top-left, center, or bottom;
•color: a quantized RGB mode over contributing pixels; and
•visible: false when no unique pixel delta exceeds the threshold.
All measurements are cached by SVG content, render parameters, and a versioned format key. A full SVG is
rendered once and each eligible node is hidden and rendered once on a cold cache. Subsequent uses read the
attached statistics from disk.
4.2 What the model sees
The heavy path coordinates remain protected. The new information is a compact field attached to the node that
already has a stable ID:
3

SVGPatchLab Technical Report Render-Derived Node Context
{
"id": "n7",
"parent": "n0",
"tag": "path",
"attributes": {"fill": "#ff0000"},
"protected_geometry": {
"d": {"sha256": "...", "characters": 20}
},
"resolved_style": {"fill": "#ff0000"},
"visual": {
"bbox": [5.0, 5.0, 10.0, 10.0],
"area_pct": 1.0,
"position": "top-left",
"color": "#ff0000"
}
}
The model receives the instruction and the JSON skeleton as text. It matches phrases such as “small,” “red,” and
“top-left” to the fields, emits a patch targetingn7 with stroke #000000, and the existing validator and executor
apply that patch to the unmodified source.
4.3 Meaning ofvisible:false
visible:false means only that hiding the node caused no measurable unique pixel contribution at the selected
resolution and threshold. It is useful as weak negative evidence, but it is not proof that the node is semantically
irrelevant or fully occluded. The same observation can arise when:
•an identical-colored overlayer masks the change;
•the visual effect is below the raster threshold;
•the node is extremely small or faint; or
•a renderer does not reproduce an SVG feature faithfully.
4.4 Three-hop implementation path
Measure
get_or_compute(svg)→full and node-hidden renders produce
cached statistics
Attach
build_scene(svg,
visual_stats=stats)
→each node receives itsvisualfield
Use
json.dumps(scene)plus instruction→model patch, validation, and execution on
the original SVG
4.5 Recommended production strategy
The most efficient robust design is a hybrid, not a universal use of either method:
Table 2: Recommended visual-attribution strategy for an SVG withNnodes.
Path Render cost Use when Role
Unique-color ID
buffer
2 total Opaque, supported, leaf-oriented
SVG
Fast default attribution
Hide and compareN+ 1cold,
cached
afterward
Complex compositing, group
semantics, or unsupported features
Faithful fallback and audit
Generator
completion
Model call only
after deletion
trigger
Required geometry is absent, not
merely covered
Reconstruct missing underlayer
The current reported A/B intentionally retains the hide-and-diff treatment to keep its meaning fixed across all pilot
results. The ID-buffer fast path should be introduced as a separately named treatment and tested for descriptor
equivalence before it replaces the slower cache fill in production.
4

SVGPatchLab Technical Report Render-Derived Node Context
5 Clean A/B boundary
The treatment architecture inherits from the control and overrides onlyscene_for(). Both arms use:
•the same prompt template and JSON serialization;
•the same Qwen 2.5 7B model configuration and deterministic temperature;
•no image input, including when the adapter advertises image support;
•the same patch parser, policy, validator, and executor;
•the same cases in the same order; and
•the same structural and raster evaluators.
Regression tests stripvisual from the treatment scene and assert exact equality with the control scene. They also
assert identical request metadata, absence of image payloads, and identical SVG output when the model response
is held fixed. Consequently, observed differences can be attributed to the additional text fields, subject to normal
nondeterminism in the serving stack.
Excluded comparison. visual_skeleton_patch sends a whole rendered image and is not the treatment evaluated
here. Including it would change both input modality and architecture, destroying the one-variable A/B boundary.
6 Sun and cloud case study
The sun-cloud example separates node grounding from geometry completion.
6.1 Case A: the sun is structurally complete
If the SVG contains a full sun circle painted below a cloud, the correct edit is simplyremove_element(cloud).
The hidden part of the sun already exists; normal SVG painter order reveals it after cloud removal. A generator is
unnecessary and could damage unrelated geometry.
6.2 Case B: the sun geometry is incomplete
If the sun was flattened, clipped, merged with the cloud, or authored only as a visible crescent, removal exposes a
hole. The node selector can still identify the cloud, but the existing source does not contain enough geometry to
restore the missing region. This is where a small generator can be useful.
The implemented completion path is deliberately conservative:
1. select candidate nodes using per-node semantic and visual context;
2. apply the requested deletion;
3. trigger completion only when deletion creates a sufficiently large transparent hole rather than revealing a valid
underlayer;
4. ask Qwen to replace one preserved reconstruction candidate with one SVG element; and
5. accept the candidate only if it preserves the canvas, contains no unsafe SVG features, does not restore the
deleted element, changes the intended region, and stays below an outside-region error threshold.
In the live smoke artifact, the final stored SVG contains a completed circle centered at (18, 18), with radius 10 and
fill #FFAC33. The accepted attempt reported outside-region MSE 0.00178 against a maximum of 0.01, while its
inside-region and generated-change checks exceeded their minimum thresholds. This is a useful mechanism check,
not yet a quantitative completion benchmark.
5

SVGPatchLab Technical Report Render-Derived Node Context
7 Experimental setup
7.1 Frozen model and rendering
Model
Qwen 2.5 7B served by Ollama through an OpenAI-compatible adapter
Sampling
Temperature 0, maximum 768 completion tokens
Input modality
Text only for both A/B arms
Visual-stat render
64 by 64 pixels, transparent background
Evaluation render
72 by 72 pixels
Server validation
36 relevant tests passed with the Linux Cairo renderer
7.2 Metrics
The primary grounding metric is exact equality between the set of target node IDs in the predicted patch and the
gold target set. Additional metrics are:
•target precision and recall;
• exact equality with the gold patch signature, including operation, target set, and attributes, rather than
byte-for-byte JSON equality;
•valid SVG output rate;
• failure-aware raster mean squared error (MSE), where lower is better and a missing, invalid, or unrenderable
output receives 1.0;
•paired wins and losses on the same case; and
•prompt-token and model-latency cost.
7.3 Official smoke
The official smoke uses 10 matched SVGEditBench task cases: two each from color change, contour, upside-down,
transparency, and crop. These cases reuse two unique source SVGs across five instructions, so they are not 10
independent visual samples. The smoke checks compatibility across the normal task mix, but only four task cases
are node-grounding tasks.
7.4 Path-only spatial probe
The probe was constructed to remove baseline shortcuts:
•four nodes are allpathelements with the same red fill;
•each protecteddstring has the same character count;
•coordinates are exposed only as opaque hashes;
•two unique DOM layouts permute the mapping between node order and position; and
•each instruction selects one of the four corners.
This probe directly asks whether the treatment exposes spatial information unavailable in the control context.
6

SVGPatchLab Technical Report Render-Derived Node Context
7.5 Expanded 39-source holdout
The expanded suite removes the pilot’s source-reuse weakness. It contains 39 matched cases and 39 distinct source
SVGs:
• 27 position cases cover all nine labels in the 3 by 3 spatial grid, with three independently generated sources per
label;
•12 size cases cover smallest, second-smallest, second-largest, and largest, again with three sources per label;
• every source uses a distinct deterministic DOM permutation, balanced target-node indices, small coordinate
jitter, and aspect variation;
• all candidates remain same-fillpath nodes, raw coordinates are SHA-only, and every protected path string has
the same character count; and
• a manifest freezes seed 20260725, prompt v4, the prompt-template hash, source and answer hashes, and the
expected target for every case.
Runtime validation fails closed if a target crosses its spatial bin, relative size order changes, path coordinates leak,
or the active prompt differs from the frozen version.
8 Results
8.1 Official 10-case matched smoke
Table 3: Official smoke results. Percentages are over 10 matched task cases from 2 unique source SVGs.
Metric Skeleton + visual tags Change
Exact target set 70%90%+20 points
Exact patch 20%50%+30 points
Valid output 60%90%+30 points
Mean failure-aware MSE 0.40580.1002-75.3%
Prompt tokens 17,694 21,279 +20.3%
Mean model latency 9.42 s 9.99 s +6.1%
For exact targets there were two visual-only wins, no skeleton-only wins, seven cases correct in both arms, and one
correct in neither. For exact patches there were three visual-only wins and no skeleton-only wins. Failure-aware
MSE favored the visual arm on four cases, the skeleton arm on none, with six ties.
This result is encouraging but not a strong grounding test: the four official color and contour cases had 100% exact
target selection in both arms because their rectangle and circle coordinates were visible in the ordinary skeleton.
8.2 Path-only spatial grounding probe
Table 4: Spatial probe results. Percentages are over 8 matched instructions from 2 unique layout SVGs.
Metric Skeleton + visual
tags
Change
Exact target set 0%75%+75 points
Exact patch 0%75%+75 points
Valid output 100% 100% no change
Mean failure-aware MSE 0.010080.00175-82.6%
Prompt tokens 14,272 17,224 +20.7%
Mean model latency 10.27 s9.60 s-6.5%
7

SVGPatchLab Technical Report Render-Derived Node Context
Six instructions were visual-only target wins, none were skeleton-only wins, and both arms missed two. A naive
instruction-level sign test would givep = 0.03125, but that calculation is not an inferential result because the
instructions are clustered within only two layout SVGs. The result is therefore reported as mechanism evidence; a
larger held-out set of independently generated sources is required for uncertainty estimates.
8.3 Expanded spatial and size holdout
Table 5: Expanded holdout results over 39 matched, distinct source SVGs.
Metric Skeleton + visual tags Change
Exact target set 7.7%33.3%+25.6 points
Exact patch 7.7%33.3%+25.6 points
Mean target precision 14.7%40.3%+25.5 points
Mean target recall 48.7%69.2%+20.5 points
Valid output 100% 100% no change
Mean failure-aware MSE 0.014000.01031-26.4%
Prompt tokens 92,404 116,833 +26.4%
Mean model latency 11.75 s 14.44 s +22.9%
Table 6: Exact targets by held-out descriptor family.
Family Skeleton + visual
tags
Visual-
only wins
Position, 27 sources 2/27 (7.4%)11/27
(40.7%)
9
Relative size, 12 sources 1/12 (8.3%)2/12
(16.7%)
1
Overall, 39 sources 3/39 (7.7%)13/39
(33.3%)
10
Across exact targets, 10 sources were visual-only wins, none were skeleton-only wins, three were correct in both
arms, and 26 were correct in neither. An exact two-sided McNemar/sign test on the 10 discordant pairs gives
p = 0.001953. Position alone had nine visual-only and no skeleton-only wins (p = 0.003906); size had only one and
zero (p = 1.0). These tests establish directional consistency on this controlled suite, not an effect size for natural
SVGs. Raster error was lower for the visual arm on 14 sources, lower for the skeleton arm on four, and tied on 21.
The residual errors are informative. All outputs were valid, so the remaining problem is grounding behavior rather
than patch execution. All 78 patches used the correct operation, stroke color, and stroke width. Of 26 visual-arm
target errors, 10 selected every candidate, five selected a partial multi-node set, and 11 selected one wrong path.
The wrong singleton was always the residual defaultn2 or n5. The generic contour rule still competes with spatial
and relative-size modifiers. Visual metadata helps substantially, especially for position, but a four-field tag does
not by itself make a 7B patch planner a reliable ranking model.
The latency increase is descriptive only because the arms ran sequentially and were not counterbalanced. Prompt
tokens are the clean cost measurement.
8.4 Prompt sensitivity
A shared experimental prompt explicitly instructed the model to combine visual descriptors conjunctively. The
retained spatial-v2 artifact shows that it raised the blind spatial baseline from 0% to 37.5%, while the treatment
remained at 75%. A transient official check degraded treatment behavior, but that run artifact was not retained
and no numerical claim is made from it. The experimental prompt was rejected; prompt v4 remains the frozen
default.
8

SVGPatchLab Technical Report Render-Derived Node Context
9 Interpretation
9.1 What the evidence supports
The clean A/B supports a narrow causal claim: adding per-node render-derived position, extent, area, and color to
an otherwise unchanged text prompt can improve target-node selection when path geometry is protected. On 39
distinct held-out sources, exact targets rose by 25.6 points, with 10 visual-only wins and no skeleton-only wins.
Exact-target direction, mean precision and recall, and raster error all agree.
9.2 What the evidence does not support
The current fields do not provide object names such as “cloud,” “sun,” or “tree.” They make words like “small,”
“red,” and “top-left” groundable. Semantic object recognition still comes from tag/style clues, composition, future
learned labels, or a separate vision-language stage. Likewise, counterfactual rendering measures visible contribution,
not the complete amodal shape of an occluded object. The 33.3% held-out exact rate also shows that metadata
availability is not equivalent to reliable model use.
9.3 Efficiency
The treatment increased prompt size by approximately 20% in both pilots and 26.4% on the larger nine-node
holdout scenes. Model latency did not move consistently across the pilots and increased 22.9% on the holdout.
The arms were executed sequentially rather than randomized or counterbalanced, so this is not a causal latency
comparison. Token count is the reliable model-cost signal.
Rendering cost is front-loaded and cacheable. For repeated instructions on the same SVG, the warm-cache cost is
a JSON lookup rather than a fresh render per node. Cold-cache and warm-cache preprocessing time should be
reported separately in the expanded evaluation.
10 Limitations and failure modes
1. Small and clustered pilots.Ten official task cases reuse two unique sources, while eight pilot instructions
reuse two layout SVGs. The 39-source holdout fixes source reuse but remains modest.
2. Synthetic holdout.Its ambiguity is controlled, but all candidates are generated red paths under one contour
task and one prompt wording. It does not capture the object, compositing, and authoring diversity of real
SVGs.
3. Unique contribution, not full shape.The difference mask describes pixels that change when a node is
hidden. Covered regions are not recovered.
4. Raster sensitivity.Very small, faint, filtered, or anti-aliased features can fall below the measurement threshold
at 64 pixels.
5. Renderer fidelity.Filters, masks, blend modes, markers, external resources, and fonts can vary across
renderers.
6. Groups and ownership.Hiding a group can measure the union of descendants, while hiding one leaf measures
only that leaf. Prompts must not confuse containment with semantic identity.
7. No learned object labels.Nodes with similar color, area, and position remain ambiguous when the instruction
names an object class.
8. Generation risk.A completion model can hallucinate, duplicate, or shift geometry. It must remain
trigger-gated and validator-gated.
9. Incomplete system provenance.The holdout manifest records the seed, prompt hash, source hashes, and
expected targets, but hardware, git commit, cache state, and server load still need automatic capture.
11 Next steps
The next evaluation should preserve the clean A/B boundary while increasing coverage:
9

SVGPatchLab Technical Report Render-Derived Node Context
1. complete and analyze the launched 500-task-case official matrix per arm, totaling 1,000 Qwen calls over 100
unique source SVGs;
2. separate target ranking from patch planning so a generic same-color contour rule cannot over-select nodes after
a spatial modifier identifies one object;
3. test explicit ordinal fields such as size rank and numeric centroid in a new, separately named treatment;
4. benchmark the two-render ID-buffer fast path against hide-and-diff for descriptor equivalence, preprocessing
speed, and unsupported-feature fallback;
5. extend the holdout to partial overlap, visibility controls, groups, and real authored path shapes; and
6. construct a deletion/completion benchmark with known complete and incomplete underlayers, recording
cold-cache and warm-cache timing.
12 Reproducibility
12.1 Official paired run
python -m svgpatchlab.cli matrix \
--config configs/experiments/skeleton_patch.json \
--model-config configs/models/qwen2.5-7b-ollama.json \
--architectures skeleton_patch visual_stats_patch \
--render \
--output-root runs/qwen2.5-7b-visual-stats-ab-full-v1
12.2 Paired analysis
python scripts/analyze_visual_stats_ab.py \
--root runs/qwen2.5-7b-visual-stats-ab-full-v1 \
--dataset-root SVGEditBench
12.3 Pilot spatial probe
python scripts/run_spatial_grounding_probe.py \
--model-config configs/models/qwen2.5-7b-ollama.json \
--output-root runs/qwen2.5-7b-spatial-grounding-probe-v1
12.4 Expanded held-out suite
python scripts/run_spatial_grounding_holdout.py \
--model-config configs/models/qwen2.5-7b-ollama.json \
--output-root runs/qwen2.5-7b-spatial-grounding-holdout-v1 \
--seed 20260725
13 Conclusion
The most efficient current route to context-aware SVG node selection is not to ask a generator to redraw every
candidate and not to send an unlinked whole image. It is to compute a reusable attribution record once, attach it
to stable node IDs, and let the existing patch model operate normally. On the stronger 39-source holdout, that
addition raised exact target selection from 7.7% to 33.3%, with 10 visual-only paired wins and no skeleton-only
wins. The same result also exposes the next bottleneck: Qwen often over-selects same-color paths, and relative-size
reasoning remains much weaker than position grounding.
For the sun-cloud example, the decision is now precise. Use render-derived context to select and remove the cloud.
If the full sun exists underneath, stop. Only when deletion reveals genuinely missing geometry should the guarded
Qwen completion path reconstruct the preserved sun node.
10

SVGPatchLab Technical Report Render-Derived Node Context
References
[1] Xuancheng Liu, Teng Hu, Ran Yi, Chenyang Shi, Wenbo Li, Yu-Kun Lai, and Paul L. Rosin.LayerSVG:
Layer-wise Semantic Editable Scalable Vector Graphics Synthesis. ICLR 2026 withdrawn submission, submitted
15 September 2025. https://openreview.net/forum?id=4lEZLpXKkq. The supplied PDF is the anonymous
double-blind manuscript.
11